Jaeger and Zipkin: Config & docs upgrade (#64250)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/datasources/zipkin/_index.md

| **User**       | Defines the user name for basic authentication.                          |
| **Password**   | Defines the password for basic authentication.                           |

### Trace to logs

![Trace to logs settings](/media/docs/tempo/tempo-trace-to-logs-9-4.png)

> **Note:** Available in Grafana v7.4 and higher.
> If you use Grafana Cloud, open a [support ticket in the Cloud Portal](/profile/org#support) to access this feature.

The **Trace to logs** setting configures the [trace to logs feature]({{< relref "../../explore/trace-integration" >}}) that is available when you integrate Grafana with Zipkin.

There are two ways to configure the trace to logs feature:

- Use a simplified configuration with default query, or
- Configure a custom query where you can use a [template language]({{< relref "../../dashboards/variables/variable-syntax">}}) to interpolate variables from the trace or span.

#### Use a simple configuration

1. Select the target data source.
1. Set start and end time shift. As the logs timestamps may not exactly match the timestamps of the spans in trace it may be necessary to search in larger or shifted time range to find the desired logs.

> 1. Select which tags to use in the logs query. The tags you configure must be present in the spans attributes or resources for a trace to logs span link to appear. You can optionally configure a new name for the tag. This is useful for example if the tag has dots in the name and the target data source does not allow using dots in labels. In that case you can for example remap `http.status` to `http_status`.
> 1. Optionally switch on the **Filter by trace ID** and/or **Filter by span ID** setting to further filter the logs if your logs consistently contain trace or span IDs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Select which tags to use in the logs query. The tags you configure must be present in the spans attributes or resources for a trace to logs span link to appear. You can optionally configure a new name for the tag. This is useful if the tag has dots in the name and the target data source does not allow using dots in labels. In that case, you can for example remap `http.status` to `http_status`.
1. Optionally, switch on the **Filter by trace ID** and/or **Filter by span ID** setting to further filter the logs if your logs consistently contain trace or span IDs.
```

#### Configure a custom query

1. Select the target data source.

> 1. Set start and end time shift. As the logs timestamps may not exactly match the timestamps of the spans in the trace it may be necessary to widen or shift the time range to find the desired logs.
> 1. Optionally select tags to map. These tags can be used in the custom query with `${__tags}` variable. This variable will interpolate the mapped tags as list in an appropriate syntax for the data source and will only include the tags that were present in the span omitting those that weren't present. You can optionally configure a new name for the tag. This is useful in cases where the tag has dots in the name and the target data source does not allow using dots in labels. For example, you can remap `http.status` to `http_status` in such a case. If you don't map any tags here, you can still use any tag in the query like this `method="${__span.tags.method}"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Set start and end time shift. Since the logs timestamps may not exactly match the timestamps of the spans in the trace, you may need to widen or shift the time range to find the desired logs.
1. Optionally, select tags to map. These tags can be used in the custom query with `${__tags}` variable. This variable will interpolate the mapped tags as list in an appropriate syntax for the data source and will only include the tags that were present in the span omitting those that weren't present. You can optionally configure a new name for the tag. This is useful when the tag has dots in the name and the target data source does not allow using dots in labels. For example, you can remap `http.status` to `http_status`. If you don't map any tags here, you can still use any tag in the query like this `method="${__span.tags.method}"`.
```

| **Use custom query**      | Toggles use of custom query with interpolation.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| **Query**                 | Input to write custom query. Use variable interpolation to customize it with variables from span.                                                                                                                                                                            |

### Trace to metrics

> **Note:** This feature is behind the `traceToMetrics` [feature toggle]({{< relref "../../setup-grafana/configure-grafana#feature_toggles" >}}).
> If you use Grafana Cloud, open a [support ticket in the Cloud Portal](/profile/org#support) to access this feature.

The **Trace to metrics** section configures the [trace to metrics feature](/blog/2022/08/18/new-in-grafana-9.1-trace-to-metrics-allows-users-to-navigate-from-a-trace-span-to-a-selected-data-source/) available when integrating Grafana with Zipkin.

> **To configure trace to metrics:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure trace to metrics:
```

| **Duration** | _(Default)_ Displays the span duration on the span bar row.                                                                      |
| **Tag**      | Displays the span tag on the span bar row. You must also specify which tag key to use to get the tag value, such as `span.kind`. |

## Query the data source

You can query and display traces from Zipkin via [Explore]({{< relref "../../explore/" >}}).

This topic explains configuration and queries specific to the Zipkin data source.
For general documentation on querying data sources in Grafana, see [Query and transform data]({{< relref "../../panels-visualizations/query-transform-data" >}}).

### Query by trace ID

> **To query a particular trace:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To query a particular trace:
```
